["Using Chinese to Understand Generative AI's Language Learning
Potential"]{.c13 .c10 .c3}

[]{.c0}

[Written by: Andrew Scheiner & Lauren Johnston]{.c0}

[EDST370: "Education and Emerging Technologies", Dickinson College]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        Everyone remembers those frustrating moments of trying to talk
to customer service chatbots when they are trying to cancel their phone
bill or find out a package's shipping status. Communicating with a
"robot" on your computer can be a real struggle, especially for those
without great technological skills who desire some help. But what if I
told you that a new wave of technology has come out with a chatbot that
can do as much as translate foreign languages for you? See, November
30th, 2022 was a day that changed the trajectory of human connection
with artificial intelligence (AI). On this day, a large AI research
corporation named OpenAI released its first demo version of a brand-new
intelligent chatbot whose name will go down in history - ChatGPT.
Hopefully this product name rings a bell, but I won't be able to know if
hearing ChatGPT gives you the chills or makes you really, really excited
to get to work with an incredible new piece of technology. Whether you
are afraid that this is the first step in robots taking over the world
or not, we are here to talk about how generative AI chatbots like
ChatGPT can help improve the future of education, and specifically in
the field of learning foreign languages. In our case, we investigated
the success that ChatGPT, Google's Gemini, and Microsoft's Copilot each
had in translating English to Chinese. This blog post will cover a lot,
including:]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [What generative AI is and how users can interact with it to
    translate language]{.c0}
-   [Looking into exactly how AI translates]{.c0}
-   [Describing what our experiment was - to test the performance of
    each platform]{.c0}
-   [Discuss results - talk about each model specifically and then about
    AI as a whole]{.c0}
-   [Concluding thoughts, translation potential, and talk about where we
    could go next]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Generative AI and Language Translations]{.c10 .c3}

[]{.c0}

[        For those who are new to the idea of generative artificial
intelligence, I would recommend to regard this technological phenomenon
as machine learning systems being capable of generating text, images,
code, or other content.]{.c3}^[\[1\]](#ftnt1){#ftnt_ref1}^[ While our
post will more specifically examine that of (1) ChatGPT, (2) Google's
Gemini, and (3) Microsoft's Copilot, there are several other platforms
such as Claude (another chatbot) and DALLE-2 (an image-generating
source) among others.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        Next, I think it's important to understand what models and
learning each of our chatbots are based on. To start, ChatGPT is a
chat-like user interface which generates text and human-like responses
using either GPT-3.5 or GPT-4, both of which are large-language models
(LLMs). In essence, LLMs are algorithms which take in huge amounts of
information from the Internet as training data to train the LLM to then
analyze, generate, and output human-like content, in particular for
interaction.]{.c3}^[\[2\]](#ftnt2){#ftnt_ref2}^

[]{.c0}

[        Then, we have Google's Gemini which is its own LLM, an
interface that users can communicate with and even ask it to generate
images! And lastly, we will look at the performance of Copilot, Bing's
chatbot that was built using the Codex-based LLM from OpenAI (the same
company that developed GPT) which also has a speciality in assisting
with computer programming.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        So how can we use this knowledge to help us learn new
languages? Well the good news is we have some great technological models
and interfaces which we will be experimenting with later on. But for
now, learning a new language can be as easy as opening up your web
browser, clicking a button, and typing in ]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

["Can you please translate 'good morning' into Spanish for me?" ]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Or]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

["I am a first-year student at a university who is taking a Spanish
class. You will play the role of my Spanish professor to help me learn.
Let's first have a conversation in Spanish and you will give me feedback
on my responses."]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        Both of these prompts that we give the chatbot will suffice our
desire in different ways. Directly asking it to translate will get the
job done for sure, but giving AI a role will make for a more fluid
conversation - encouraging independent and continued learning. In our
experiment, we will be showing sample prompts and responses and
comparing the models to one another.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Translation Specifics]{.c13 .c10 .c3}

[]{.c0}

[        It's great that we have this new tech to help us speak another
language - but how does it translate and how can we de-stigmatize
artificial intelligence? I want to take a quick step backwards and point
out a platform that many are well aware of: Google Translate. Has anyone
else wondered how it works? Well, it works very similar to how something
like GPT learns, through a neural network where a machine learns by a
massive amount of data (think of it as examples). Thus, think of the
generative AI platforms we have discussed as nothing more complex than
the way Google Translate works. Translate searches its vast amount of
knowledge it's learned from existing translation to know how to
translate what you want it to! We won't be diving into the idea of
neural networks here (it's really complex) but we recommend learning
more if you are more interested in the software/technology/business side
of educational technology.]{.c0}

[        ]{.c0}

[        The only real caveat to the difference between something like
Google's Gemini and its Translate is that Gemini (and all LLMs) are
actually predicting what word will come next in its response to you. So
when we are going to be asking it to translate something to Chinese from
English for us, Gemini will actually be predicting what the most logical
thing to say. The goal in machine learning is to teach a machine what is
correct or known through data, then use it to predict unknown data. So,
if we were to ask it to translate "Hello" for us into Chinese, Gemini
would use its vast network of knowledge to then predict that the most
logical response would be 你好 or, ]{.c3}[nǐhǎo. Luckily in this case,
Gemini made the right prediction and that is the correct translation.
Hopefully this explains why if we were to ask AI a question, it might
not always be 100% accurate. It's basically continually predicting the
next word in the response and gives it to us to evaluate.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Our Experiment]{.c13 .c10 .c3}

[]{.c10 .c3 .c13}

[        Finally what everyone has been waiting for - what our
experiment was in using generative AI to translate. Our goal was to find
how successful AI would be in translating English to Chinese. On a
"scientific" level, here were the details of our experiment:]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [Independent variables (what changed): Chatbots used and whether we
    gave them a role or asked for translations directly.]{.c0}
-   [Dependent variable (what we measured): Each chatbots' success in
    translation]{.c0}
-   [Controls: Prompts and translations that we asked them]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        First, let's look at how ChatGPT did. As for success, when we
gave it role as a teacher it correctly translated 6 out of 7 prompts,
but only 4 out of 7 when just being directly asked to translate for us.
In addition, we found that its responses were very brief. Here is an
example of what it looked like to interact with ChatGPT in asking it to
translate:]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[![ChatGPT translating \"so-so\" and \"it\'s a deal\" from English to
Chinese.](images/image3.png "ChatGPT Translating English to Chinese"){style="width: 624.00px; height: 289.33px; margin-left: 0.00px; margin-top: 0.00px; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px);"}]{style="overflow: hidden; display: inline-block; margin: 0.00px -0.00px; border: 1.33px solid #000000; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); width: 624.00px; height: 289.33px;"}

[]{.c0}

[Luckily, we had a much more improved experience working with Google's
Gemini chatbot. When we asked Gemini to directly translate for us, it
was 100% successful, which was a great start. And to our surprise, it
was even more helpful on our end when we gave Gemini a role as a
teacher. Not only did Gemini translate all of our statements correctly,
but it also:]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [Gave a more friendly response to being our Chinese teacher]{.c0}
-   [Gave more advice for helping us understand how it can be more help
    in translate]{.c0}
-   [Gave several responses for a translation often (formal, informal,
    additional options) and explained differences]{.c0}
-   [Seems more sophisticated answers]{.c0}

[![Gemini translating \"it\'s a deal\" from English to
Chinese.](images/image1.jpg "Gemini Translating English to Chinese"){style="width: 624.00px; height: 420.00px; margin-left: 0.00px; margin-top: 0.00px; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px);"}]{style="overflow: hidden; display: inline-block; margin: 0.00px -0.00px; border: 1.33px solid #000000; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); width: 624.00px; height: 420.00px;"}

[]{.c0}

[Lastly, to conclude our experiment, we observed Bing's Copilot. We were
pleased to see that Copilot was 100% successful in translating our seven
statements when asked to both directly translate and act as our teacher.
The best feature we found was that we were given hyperlinks for which
sources it drew its responses from. However, at first with the
roleplay - it began in only Chinese. Once we prompt it for translations,
it talks in English while giving the Chinese translations. So our
experiment started with telling Copilot we are a first-year student and
it automatically started in Chinese - this is a problem as it might be
daunting to try and read a response in only Chinese when you are still
learning.]{.c0}

[![Copilot translating \"it\'s a deal\" from English to
Chinese.](images/image2.png "Copilot Translating English to Chinese"){style="width: 624.00px; height: 238.67px; margin-left: 0.00px; margin-top: 0.00px; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px);"}]{style="overflow: hidden; display: inline-block; margin: -0.00px -0.00px; border: 1.33px solid #000000; transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); -webkit-transform: rotate(0.00rad) translateZ(0px); width: 624.00px; height: 238.67px;"}

[]{.c0}

[Results and Platform Performance]{.c10 .c3}

[]{.c0}

[        As we analyze the impact of our experiment, the best place to
start is that we can clearly get more effective and accurate translation
output out of Gemini and Copilot rather than using ChatGPT. The
platforms which have the most potential to be used as "teaching
assistants" can be seen in Gemini and Copilot while ChatGPT seems to be
much more similar to the application of Google Translate - a direct
translator. But it's important to note using chatbots can be an upgrade
over Google Translate because we can have a flowing, human-like
conversation and we can save our conversation history (and even copy the
output!). Now that we know Gemini and Copilot can be the best
conversational translation chatbots, which should we use? Since they
have extremely similar accuracy in responses, we recommend using Gemini
if you are more interested in several ways to say a statement and get
more explanation. Moreover, if you are interested in getting beneficial
translation responses while also being connected to external resources,
Copilot can be a great choice too.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[        If this experiment should convey anything, we hope it
alleviates the fear that these chatbots will not be taking over the
world anytime soon. But on a more serious note, generative AI has the
potential to be a massive upgrade over getting help with a homework
assignment from Google Translate. Chatbots like Gemini and Copilot can
be great secondary learning tools to expand language learning because of
their communication ability, enormous knowledge bank, and power of
explication.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Conclusion and What's Next?]{.c3 .c10}

[]{.c0}

[We think that generative AI could potentially serve as a "language
partner" for new learners. An essential part of improving one's foreign
language skills is to practice communicating. However, not everyone is
in contact with native speakers. A simple solution is to practice with
generative AI. This method cannot help a language learner communicate
orally, but it can help one practice new vocabulary and sentence
structures. Generative AI as a tool for studying is a much more engaging
method compared to reviewing textbook dialogue and can even introduce
new words.]{.c0}

[However, while generative AI has the ability to translate anything from
English into Chinese, we do not see it replacing foreign language
teachers. Based on this experiment, we can conclude that generative AI
does not have the ability to understand one's personal language level.
For example, when giving Microsoft's Copilot the role of a first-year
Chinese teacher, it instantly switched to typing in Chinese words that a
level-one student would not know, especially when first learning the
language.]{.c0}

[The phrases that we chose for this experiment were based on patterns
that do not exist in English. The generative AI that we chose are
English-based by default. One phrase in particular, "it's a deal," uses
a four-character idiom to represent the concept. These idioms (or 成语
]{.c3}[chéngyǔ]{.c3 .c8}[) are an essential part of Chinese language as
some ideas are only expressed using them.]{.c0}

[We can see future foreign language teachers encouraging students to
study with generative AI. While I highly doubt that AI can replace
teachers, it can be a very helpful tool outside of the classroom. All
forms of AI continue to evolve, but updated versions of these platforms
can be used to enrich a classroom if they serve as tools. Or, in
addition, in a large foreign language classroom, educators can use AI to
act as a teacher to students on an individual level while still having
cautious oversight into how AI is helping each student. This would help
students get the one-on-help they might require to maximize their
language learning potential.]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Thanks for reading!]{.c0}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

[\[1\]](#ftnt_ref1){#ftnt1}[ ]{.c14}[[Generative AI Defined: How It
Works, Benefits and Dangers
(techrepublic.com)](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.techrepublic.com/article/what-is-generative-ai/%23:~:text%3DGenerative%2520AI%2520is%2520a%2520type%2520of%2520artificial%2520intelligence,response%2520to%2520a%2520prompt%2520entered%2520by%2520a%2520user.&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1709658501051521&usg=AOvVaw337OLiF9weNMfPLz7o9bcW){.c12}]{.c14
.c20}[.]{.c14}

</div>

<div>

[\[2\]](#ftnt_ref2){#ftnt2}[ Wikipedia and
]{.c14}[[https://indatalabs.com/blog/chatgpt-large-language-model](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://indatalabs.com/blog/chatgpt-large-language-model&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1709658501052093&usg=AOvVaw1t7Lk_yltELy-OKy1-k3iH){.c12}]{.c20
.c14}[.]{.c14}

</div>
